the cancer field today is focusing on
mutations and targeting mutations these
are all effects they're not the cause of
cancer what is it about a chimpanzee
that or Inuits or African tribes living
according to traditional ways that makes
cancer an extremely rare uh rare event
in their in their environment and
clearly it's the environment that we
that we that we live in that's putting
us at risk for all these chronic
diseases including including cancer so
and we know how it arises we know that
you cannot get cancer if you maintain
healthy mitochondria so it starts as
Warburg said with mitochondrial
disruption so then the question is well
how do I prevent cancer well if you can
keep your mitochondria healthy well how
do you keep your mitochondria healthy
avoid highly processed carbohydrate
Foods uh do can do exercise uh this kind
of thing in other words in other words
now that we know the plan who is willing
to adapt the plan adopt the plan to
their lifestyle and it's hard because
every corner we have a fast foods we
have fast food well you know my my
father died of cancer my sister died of
cancer and had cancer twice so I'm very
interested in this subject I see so many
patients with cancer so many of my
friends and colleagues reach out to me
you know were they looking for a Hail
Mary on cancer treatment and it's one of
those horrible horrible conditions that
we haven't made a whole lot of progress
from and and it's and you know we think
you know we're a little bit better at
early detection we're a little bit
better at at some of the chemo regimens
we've gotten advances in certain areas
like immunotherapy and car T cells and
things like that but they don't work
universally uh and and we still have a
lot to learn about how to use those
Therapies
so the question is you know is there a
different way of thinking about cancer
is there a different way of looking at
how
um to understand the origins of cancer
and cancer metabolism as a way of coming
up with a radically different approach
to treating cancer you've been doing
this work for 30 years now it's pretty
much uh
an accepted form of research and
thinking but when you start it was kind
of heresy and I remember not too long
ago I was with Sid Arthur mukuji who was
a oncologist who wrote the Emperor of
all maladies when the Pulitzer Prize for
that is a leading cancer oncologist
researcher and thinker and uh he now was
doing his work really primarily on using
ketogenic diets to treat to treat cancer
and when I saw him once in a conference
he says Mark I think we finally figured
out what's the problem causing so much
cancer I'm like what's that it means
like sugar
and I'm like oh yeah of course of course
you know and we know that people who are
overweight have a high risk of cancer
people with diabetes have a higher risk
of cancer and so
um this is actually something you've
been working on for 30 years and I'd
love to sort of walk back to the origins
of this idea which arose early in the
1900s from a scientist named Otto
Warburg who talked about the Warburg
effect and he was a guy who was Theory
card hold a little bit but was mostly
discredited and ignored and it's still
sort of on their peripheral medicine but
you've taken his work to the next level
and let me just sort of talk about what
is the metabolic theory of cancer and
and how did how did out a war become a
process and and where we come since then
and let's sort of have you unpack some
of that yeah okay great well thank you
very much
yeah these are really important uh
points in our
um understanding of cancer you know
where we've been in in you know where we
are and where we need to go actually
um
yeah well you know I in my science uh
training over the years uh the word Otto
Warburg really
really was mostly in the background
um I didn't really know what what he had
done uh in any meaningful way uh as
trained geneticists and biochemists and
when when we started our work in
epilepsy at Yale University
um you know we were working
predominantly on
on biochemistry of epilepsy uh I even
try to write a grant on ketogenic diet
for epilepsy at Yale back in the 1970s
and internal Grant and they met they
basically said forget about it uh we
we've uh nobody cares about ketogenic
diets for epilepsy that was it was CH it
was Jim Abrams from um Hollywood
um whose son Charlie uh almost died from
standards treatments for uh for his
epilepsy and Jim started the Charlie
Foundation uh using ketogenic diets and
one of my students at that time that was
late in the mid mid 90s 1990s said oh
you know there's a real excitement about
this ketogenic diet I said forget about
it nobody's interested
I mean how could food have anything to
do with disease right yeah right after
my experience at Yale I said wow these
guys down here they don't care about so
anyway she went out there came back oh
man everybody's excited about this
ketogenic diet so we had developed
really some excellent models of epilepsy
in our lab we would figure trying to
figure out you know you know mapping
genes for epilepsy and doing all this
kind of stuff and um we came back she
came came back Mariana troto and said
let's try ketogenic diets on epileptic
mice and at the same time we had been
doing a lot of work in in cancer but it
was mostly biochemistry it wasn't it was
like traditional biochemistry it was no
translational benefit to the clinic uh
about most of what we were doing other
than trying to figure so we had two
parallel projects one was epilepsy one
was cancer biochemistry and then uh we
started treating our our really good
model of epilepsy with keto with calorie
restriction and restricted ketogenic
diets it all came down to the lower the
glucose the better the seizure
management management was on this so
um some some guy came in a company uh
that was interested in in a drug UH 60
oxy uh it was um and and B dnj it's it's
a kind of a drug and we found out that
if you feed it to the mice
um their seizures went away and say wow
this is really exciting but we fit we
fed into the mice with cancer and then
all of a sudden the two or went down as
well wow so what's that what's going
what's going on with this drug so um
this is a drug off known as Don right
Don no no no that wasn't done this was
um uh uh nor nor uh
nor jeromycin it's a it's a kind of a
glucose analog of some sort and
um it was having an effect on uh
epilepsy uh at least in pre-clinical
models but we tried that drug on some of
our T our our cancer mice and we found
also that it it seemed to uh reduce
tumors the same drug that we had for
epilepsy so what's going on here with
this and
um it turns out that the drug blocked
sucraces in the gut
so the animals would eat the food but
they couldn't digest the food and their
blood sugar went down
so uh the the drug company at that time
uh thought we had a blockbuster drug for
cancer because it was it was shrinking
tumors but the mechanism wasn't known
um about how that worked uh then when we
found out that uh well the animals were
eating food but they were losing body
weight uh and the tumors were shrinking
so we said what the hell is going on
with that so then when I put in a
control group of mice feed them uh uh
until their Body Works cut their
calories down until the body weight of
the control mice not getting the drug
and the mice getting the drug were the
same and we found that the tumor shrunk
uh just as just as well in the control
guys as it did in the in the drug
treated guys
and the drug the drug was simply
preventing the the mouse from eating the
food and digesting the food
went down so when I told the company
that this drug was working through
calorie restriction
they dropped the project immediately
they didn't want any part of this so uh
they want to move on now we want drugs
that are good I said yeah you can get
the same effect if you restrict calories
so that then
so so you'll find out how fast people uh
are they're all excited Until you
realize what the mechanism is and then
when you realize all you have to do is
just cut calories and get the same
effect that wasn't exciting so um but we
were excited about it and and we thought
you know what that what is the mechanism
by which calorie restriction uh is have
such a powerful effect on reducing
cancer brain cancer in particular and
then we started to hear about Warburg
and he was saying it's it's the the
tumor cells are dependent on glucose and
these drugs block glucose and the
calorie restriction blocks glucose so we
started to then bring in what Auto
Warburg had was saying for a long time
and and then um you know uh we started
to do the mechanism of action action and
what we found was calorie restricted
diets that would reduce blood sugar and
Elevate Ketone bodies which is an
evolutionarily conserved adaptation to
food restriction we all go into ketosis
if we stop eating food for a long enough
period of time you know we our brain our
brains have to have some level of energy
and what happens is is the blood sugar
goes down you start mobilizing fats
making them go to the they go to the
liver and you make water soluble Ketone
bodies that go to the brain and allow
the brain to burn energy in in the
presence of low glucose I know the
tissue is the heart as well so so so we
were looking into all of this stuff and
we found that calorie restriction is
powerfully
anti-angiogenic which means the abnormal
blood vessels and tumors are really
hammered and that at that time in early
tumor cells need the blood flow and the
blood vessels to go there yeah they're
they're abnormal too the the blood
vessels are leaky they're abnormal um
and and that was thought to be
provocative to the growth of the tumor
and as you know during the early 2000s
they were coming out with all these
anti-angiogenic therapies from the
pharmaceutical industry
um many of them which don't work uh and
we found out why they they don't work
for the most part
um but at that time it was a hot area
you know anti-angiogenic therapy was
like a Judah Volkman and a lot of
well-known people were were saying how
powerful these anti-angiogenic therapies
you know Napoleon Ferrara who later come
out and said most of them don't work a
lot of them were pulled off the market
for all these adverse effects some of
them are still on the market which to me
makes no sense at all but but any event
it was a hot area and we showed the
calorie restriction could be as powerful
or more powerful than anti-angiogenic
and then we did some really good
mechanistic work on inflammation NF
Kappa B inflammation was targeted by
calorie restriction
um and then the cells were dying through
a variety of mechanisms tumor cells were
dying the micro environment was becoming
much much less inflamed angiogenesis was
going away and I'm saying what the hell
you know this stuff is this calorie
restriction is really powerful and we
were doing it in the mouse and then we
realized you know what does calorie
restriction mean in the mouse to a human
and then when we compared the base
differences in basal metabolic rate
between The Mouse and the human we
realized that the human could get the
same effects as this calorie restricted
Mouse only if they did water only
therapeutic fasting well nobody wants to
hear about that you know let's be honest
let me know oh well you know who's going
to go out and do all that stuff but we
started to look more and more into the
mechanisms of action by which calorie
restriction and then with our with our
knowledge of ketogenic diets I said why
don't we consider putting a key shifting
just water only fasting to calorie
because that's what that's ultimately
what Wilder found in the 1920s for
managing epilepsy he said people with
epilepsy who went on water only fasting
invariably their seizures would go away
but it wasn't a sustained way to treat
epilepsy so so he developed the
ketogenic diet as a prolonged way of
treating epileptic seizures so I said
what makes calorie restriction right
when you're fasting your body starts to
burn fat from your fat stores so it's a
survival mechanism and we end up having
the ability to actually burn fat which
mimics calorie restriction that's right
and what you do is when you water only
fast your blood sugar goes down and your
ketones go up
um and then Wilder said why don't we get
a diet that will make blood sugar go
down and ketones go up and that was a
ketogenic diet but it was quite
unpalatable at the time
um but I said let's let's let's try that
same concept with cancer and some people
had uh dabbled with that in the past but
not in a serious way so we kind of
launched a much more aggressive and
serious evaluation of how we can move
someone from water only fasting into
another therapy that would that would
have a similar uh benefit and then of
course at a warburg's Concepts came in
and I looked at what Warburg had said
and we started getting his papers trans
some of his German papers translated
into English I read all of his all of
his major papers and his argument was
his argument was that in cancer uh there
is some defect in the ability of the
mitochondrion in the cell to produce
energy uh which is the way most of our
cells get energy may we breathe oxygen
and oxygen is a form of uh serves as the
final common acceptor of electrons in
our mitochondria to generate energy
through oxidative phosphorylation and he
said that's broken in cancer
what he basically said was in order for
us to produce energy in our cells most
of us combine oxygen with sugar in this
kind of chemical reaction down an
assembly line called oxidative
phosphorylation it's kind of the normal
way you produce energy from food and
it's through glucose uh primarily and
oxygen so that's what that's what you're
talking about yeah yeah yeah so so we we
bring we bring glucose into the cell or
other foods that would be broken down
into either into glucose or acetyl-coa
which is the end product of the
glycolytic pathway pyru so the cell
brings in glucose there's a 10-step
pathway called glycolysis the old emden
meyerhof parenths pathway and then the
pyruvate which is this a three-carbon
derivative of glucose is then enters
into the mitochondrion is fully oxidized
uh to produce significant amounts of
energy with the key waste products being
water and CO2
so every time we exhale we're exhaling
the waste products of food metabolism
which are which is CO2 and and the
moisture water we can develop urine from
uh combining with amino acid breakdown
products so it's a very highly efficient
uh highly highly energy efficient system
but Warburg was saying
uh that cancer cells have a defeat
defect in their mitochondria and that
defect is compensated for by a
upregulation of these ancient glycolytic
fermentation so glycolysis is present in
all of our cells the problem is when the
mitochondria become defective the end
product of glycolysis pyruvic acid is no
longer entering the mitochondria but is
being diverted to lactic acid a waste
product of the glycolytic pathway and
that acidifies the cancer micro
environment so cancer then becomes a a a
a a a a a disease of cells that
proliferate with instead of producing
oxygen CO2 and water they're producing
lactic acid as a waste product
so and and Warburg noticed that all the
major cancers that he studied were all
blowing out large amounts of this lactic
acid and and he said I just kind of what
accumulates in your muscles when you
over exercise it causes exactly exactly
but they but then that deficit is made
up as soon as the oxygen can be the
muscles can be re-oxygenated they go
back to respiring so the muscles have a
capacity that when oxygen becomes
deficient from overuse of muscles the
muscle will then use the local glucose
to produce uh massive amounts of quick
energy with the waste product of lactic
acid which goes back into the
bloodstream in exercise folks and the
lactic acid goes to the liver and is
created back to glucose and that's the
Cory cycle and Saul and Gertie Corey
receive the Nobel Prize for their for
their recognition of how lactic acid
from muscles can be reconverted back
into glucose for the body okay
I I think that what you just said was so
important I want to make sure everybody
gets it and then we can kind of continue
with on how this relates to cancer so
everybody basically basically from my
understanding is that when we eat our
food is is primarily turning to glucose
glucose then has to go through this
process of breakdown into byproducts we
call pyruvate and there's a whole bunch
of steps that then turns that into
energy in the body with cancer cells
that basically processes and is is kind
of defective and so it turns instead of
turning into easy form energy from
glucose it creates lactic acid which
changes the whole environment itself and
basically the other sort of point I
think it's important to realize is that
your your body is like a hybrid car it
can run on gas or electric
your cancer cells and the gases sugar
and the electric is fat okay in cancer
cells they don't run well on fat and it
basically Stars them they only can run
on sugar which is gas but it's kind of a
dirty burning fuel and that ends up with
all this this linkage of cancer to
things like diabetes and then some
resistance and all these various factors
so that's all how it ties together now
then take the sounds of this process of
the secondary pathway which is
fermentation instead of what we call the
primary pathway burning energy which is
oxidative phosphorylation essentially
the Krebs cycle it's how we break down
sugar and energy so so I think I just
sort of want to like reinforce that
because there was a lot in there no no
you're you're 100 correct mark this
sometimes can be a little overwhelming
I mean even most doctors by the way like
you know we remembered biochemistry for
just enough for our exams and then we
forget it all including the Krebs cycle
which is what you're talking about which
is how we turn food and oxygen into
energy but it's one of the most
important things we do
you know it's it's really an interesting
thing because you know most of us when
we had to study the Krebs cycle as as a
requirement uh only because it was
tortuous to try to memorize all this you
know and it was it was no pleasure in in
doing that other than the fact that you
say oh if you memorize it you
regurgitate it on a test and then you
wouldn't have to worry about it again so
um but when when when when when we are
in a different in a different sphere now
where we really need to understand that
in order to manage a very devastating
disease so you haven't you I take I I
took a completely different view of
these tortuous biochemical Pathways when
I said I needed to know this in order to
manage the cancer not in order to have
an effective non-toxic management of the
tumor so now it becomes
um a a process it becomes part of your
soul to understand these processes yeah
because because you're going to be able
to wield the power of your knowledge to
manage a disease because you finally
understand what all this all this crap
meant and and uh so now we realize that
as Warburg said uh cancer cells don't
need oxygen for their growth
um and and what and he showed data that
you know he can take all the oxygen out
of the system and these tumor cells were
still growing fine and his argument was
they they replaced their oxidative
phosphorylation or energy through
respiration with energy through
fermentation fermentation is energy
without oxygen and he was he said that
they were getting okay wine or beer
right yeah yeah well the the byproduct
that's an alcohol that's um alcoholic
fermentation lactic acid fermentation
there's an extra step by that the yeast
use to to convert the the the lactate
into uh ethanol so uh um but that's a
that's another step uh our muscles and
our cancer cells are producing lactic
acid as a waste product uh of the
fermentation uh process so
um so as a result but Warburg was saying
that the you have to replace energy so
without energy nothing will grow period
that's the key basis of all of our life
uh existence without energy we die real
quick and you want to know how fast we
can die if people drink cyanide you die
real real fast
um
yeah it poises complex four and the
mitochondria shuts down electron
transport prevents oxygen from binding
to electrons and your whole body just
shuts down instantly
cyanide you just can't make energy and
then you die can't make energy your
brain dies your heart dies everything
dies anything that's linked to oxidative
phosphorylation dies real quick
um except the cancer cell so that's the
so Warburg said cancer cells are
resistance to cyanide I say whoa this is
uh so they don't need they don't need
oxygen and they don't and they can live
in Cyanide and I said whoa what the hell
is this uh but he said a long time ago
in the 1920s they they were showing this
kind of thing they would take a rat that
had a a tumor and they would inject the
rat with Cyanide and the rat would die
instantly but not the tumor you could
take the tumor out and grow the cells
and culture was fine the tumor was
resistant to the cyanide and he said
that's because they're oxidative
phosphorylation they have replaced
oxidative phosphorylation with
fermentation which is energy without
oxygen so what what uh that became very
clear from his hundreds and hundreds of
scientific papers and analyzes and so I
went back and I looked at all that stuff
uh really really carefully and uh
confirmed in no uncertain terms that
Auto Warburg was a 100 percent correct
in his knowledge of the origin of cancer
he was not correct in the readouts and
I'll explain that in a minute because
we've clear we've cleared that all up uh
the misinformation regarding the
readouts of of uh dysfunctional
respiration but he claimed that cancer
starts with a chronic disruption of
oxidative phosphor energy through
oxidative respiration then the cell will
gradually over time transition to this
ancient process of fermentation and he
also clearly said that if you damage
respiration too acutely the cell will
die and you will not get a cancer cell
from a dead cell and that's exactly what
happens with the cyanide you can never
get if your the whole body is dead
there's no way you're going to get a
cancer cell but if you have a cancer
cell in there it's not going to die from
cyanide so as I said so people with
cancer take drink cyanide to kill
themselves well they'll kill their body
but the tumor cells in their body will
still remain alive
so as long as they have the fermentable
fuels in the micro environment and at
that time orberg figured that the major
fermentable fuel was the sugar glucose
so glucose can either be completely
respired in the mitochondria of the cell
or it can be fermented if the
mitochondria are not functional or the
individual would be in a low oxygen
environment so so it became clear to
Warburg that the release of large
amounts of lactic acid from tumor cells
was the result of a defect in oxidative
phosphorylation and this then could
explain the origin of cancer problem is
in the 1950s Sydney Winehouse and others
who was the the head of the National
Cancer Institute and rightly so reported
that there were some cancer cells that
took in as much oxygen as some of normal
cells so he said Warburg must be wrong
because the oxygen consumption we're
seeing cancer cells that are taking in
oxygen as as avidly as normal cells and
yet the cancer cell is still blowing out
lactic acid what's going on with this so
they said then oh the cancer cell needs
so much energy it both respires and
produces lactic acid at the same time so
this major controversy in battle went on
for years and is still going on for many
people today in the papers that they
publish showing that cancer cells
consume oxygen just as readily as normal
cells uh in culture and therefore cancer
cells are using uh oxidative
phosphorylation uh wrong we've shown
that's not the case it turns out that
the tumor cells do in fact consume
oxygen but they're not using it for ATP
synthesis they're not using the consumed
oxygen for generating energy through
oxidative phosphorylation they are using
it to produce reactive oxygen species
Ros
are carcinogenic and mutagenic these
radicals oxygen radicals damage DNA RNA
and proteins they cause the mutations
that you see in the nucleus of the tumor
cells so the oxygen consumed by cancer
cells is producing DNA damage as a
downstream epiphenomenon of the damage
to oxidative phosphorylation so the
cancer field today is focusing on
mutations and targeting mutations these
are all effects they're not the cause of
cancer and this goes back to the
argument with Sydney Winehouse and
Warburg in the 1950s except the folks
today
absolutely do not understand do not
appreciate or cannot accept the fact
that the oxygen consumption and cancer
cell is not used for oxidative
phosphorylation it it's used for
reactive oxygen species and other
reactions not involving ATP so you have
to put the store you have to put the
story together so you when you mentioned
car T immunotherapy
um all these immunotherapies they're
based on the somatic mutation Theory so
now warburg's Warburg was the initiator
of the mitochondrial metabolic theory of
cancer I will explain more because he
did not know about glutamine
fermentation which we now know about he
did not he also assumed that the oxygen
consumed by cancer cells even though it
was low was still linked to oxfos okay
that's a misunderstanding on warburg's
part he's getting him credit he was that
was over 100 years ago oh yeah it was a
hundred years ago and I and because the
pathway for glutamine fermentation was
not yet developed so he did not know
about the second major fermentable fuel
so we got he was absolutely right on the
origin of cancer he was incorrect on
assuming that lactic acid production
equaled a certain amount of ATP we now
know that that calculation is is
somewhat in error we also know that
oxygen consumption is in error so we can
put it all together orberg was 100
correct in the knowledge of how cancer
started his readouts were were were
incorrectly we're polishing it all up so
this is the mitochondrial metabolism
so basically what you're saying is that
most oncology today is focused on the
idea that cancer results from genetic
mutations in the cancer however or allow
learning at the same time is that you
can take 100 cases of breast cancer and
they may be all genetically very
different or colon cancer or prostate
cancer or pancreatic cancer and so even
though they have the same name the same
pathology on a microscope the underlying
genetics are quite different and so
we're playing a little bit of
whack-a-mole now there may be some ways
of improving cancer response to
chemotherapy by identifying which
genetic mutations there are in which
drugs work better for which ones and
it's it's sort of an incremental
Improvement but it's not a it's not a
kind of cataclysmic shift in our
thinking around cancer which is moving
from a genetic theory to a metabolic
Theory and I think the metabolic theory
is quite interesting interesting I think
it clearly needed to be fleshed out more
but it looks like it's holding promise
to deal with things like stage four
melanoma stage four pancreatic cancer
stage four breast cancer cancers that
are really death sentences are
responding even glioblastoma which is
brain cancer very well the ketogenic
diets so you kind of have to be able to
sort of navigate this new landscape
where certain cancers are really
responding to a metabolic approach and
so we can't just sort of relegate it to
some crazy whack job Theory this is
actually now becoming more mainstream
thinking well going back to what you
said about the breast cancer
um you know when you look at individual
breast tumors you know they have
different stage ones for you know all
the different kinds of
um you know her2 and and yeah the
staging and the typing which actually
may be less important yeah yeah so so
but you're 100 correct when you look at
the genetic profiles of all these
different tumors they're all essentially
different from each other I mean there's
some commonalities in mutation of course
but many of them many Studies have have
shown if we take all the individuals
sell many individual cells out of a
tumor and do a full genomic sequence no
no two cells in this in the tumor exact
have the exact same kinds of mutations
yet yet every cell in that breast tumor
has dependency on fermentation as a
source of energy so the common metabolic
problem all the cells have one major
common problem uh or or phenotype or or
observation they're all fermenting
regardless of what their mutations are
so the common pathological phenotype is
fermentation okay so then the simple
question is where do how do they get
their energy from fermentation and the
two fuels that dry fermentation are
glucose the sugar and what we have shown
is the amino acid glutamine now
glutamine for the cancer feel people
will say we all knew glutamine was a big
big role in cancer you guys in the field
thought it was being respired no because
the oxygen no it's not respired it's
fermented just like the glucose so but
it's also fermented in the mitochondria
so the mitochondria they call the
pathways called glutamanolysis and it's
a fermentation pathway in the
mitochondria so you have a fermentation
pathway in the cytoplasm and you have a
fermentation pathway in the mitochondria
which makes it look like the
mitochondria respiring especially when
they're taken in oxygen so we had to
parse out all this stuff and clearly
Define what the actual biomedical
biochemical mechanisms are that are
driving the Beast and the Beast is the
Beast is driven by fermentation and
you're you're right Mark the cells in a
glioblastoma the cells in Colon lung
they're all fermenters
so they all have different that's why
when you take uh car team immunotherapy
if you're not hitting the fermentation
pathway you're you're essentially
missing missing the target so nothing
could be like when you say oh we have a
targeted therapies Precision medicine
These Guys these targets I mean they're
missing the Target
and you pay a lot of money for a missed
Target and then you say and then you say
oh you know I have we're going to use
Precision medicine yeah well if it's so
precise how come you blew out my liver
when you were trying to cure my lung
cancer exactly yeah that's the problem
you know most of the treatments we have
now are really toxic radiation and
chemotherapy surgeries have been crude
and and and what's amazing about
metabolic oncology is the therapy is
diet and maybe some other compounds and
block some of these fermentation
Pathways that really have not only no
side effects but have a ton of
beneficial effects in terms of overall
metabolic Health in terms of reducing
inflammation improving stem cell
function causing DNA repair and and
helping deal with oxidative stress I
mean just it's just the list goes on
about how this works pretty amazing no
it is made it is it's remarkable and um
because you're all good you're going
we're going back to the origin of of
many of the diseases that we have and uh
you know a lot of this is systemic
inflammation you know chronic exposure
to different chemicals you put all that
together and you end up with diabetes
cardiovascular disease cancer dementia
you end up with all these kinds of
chronic diseases and um a lot of it has
to do with Disturbed energy bio
metabolic homeostasis is Disturbed in
many of these chronic diseases the issue
for us though is you know ferreting out
the mechanisms of how cells grow uh
cancer cells grow uh in a dysregulated
uh dysregulated way and and I think
um you know we're I I don't want to
become too diffuse and say okay let me
jump now into Alzheimer's and show you
how this works let me jump into type 2
diabetes and show me and show you how
that works the the the major Focus we
have right now is correcting massive
misinformation on how that this how
cancer cells Express this dysregulated
growth because ultimately that's what
the disease is it's cell division out of
control and they these cells are
dividing out of control because they
have lost their ability to use energy
through respiration have fallen back on
on Ancient fermentation Pathways and and
the organelle the organelle inside the
cell that controls the cell cycle and
regulated growth is the mitochondrion
and Warburg clearly showed many years
ago and I have in my own work
validated everything that orberg said
with respect to mitochondrial
dysfunction that the organ L controlling
the differentiated State and regulated
growth is dysfunctional and therefore
the cells are falling back on Ancient
fermentation Pathways and are
dysregulated in their cell growth so you
know so what's the best way to manage
cancer is pull the plug pull the plug on
their fermentation fuels and there's
only two fuels that can drive this beast
and it's glucose and glutamine so and
then they can't as you mentioned earlier
they can't burn fats or Ketone bodies
because you need a good mitochondria
oxidative phosphorylation system to
generate energy from fats and Ketone
bodies so the fats and Ketone bodies
though help the heart help the the brain
especially for Ketone bodies so you
mentioned as you said
you can all of these different chronic
diseases uh can be improved
significantly uh by this metabolic
approach because when you burn ketones
you essentially increase the metabolic
homeostasis of normal cells so and the
cancer cell is marginalized it can't use
the Ketone body or the fat so you really
put them in a very compromised position
and they will gradually be eliminated
and not only that in our in our paper in
my book and in the paper we just showed
for managing cancer in the dog uh using
purely metabolic therapy when you cut
the calories down we have this process
called autolytic cannibalism it's very
interesting so uh all cells in the body
must carry their weight when food
restriction so there has to be a
coordinated interaction among all the
cells in our body and when you have a
cancer a group of cells that are using
energy in a very inefficient way and not
contributing to the Society of the cells
the body will turn on those cancer cells
and use them as fuel eat them and Supply
their their metabolites for the rest
called autolytic cannibalism and in
order to get in order to get into that
stage you have to lower blood sugars and
you have to increase ketones and then
the body starts turning on these cancer
cells and dissolving them so does it
have to be both calorie restricted and
ketogenic because ketogenic diets aren't
necessarily calorie restricted although
people might want to eat less because
they're not as hungry because fat
inhibits appetite yeah in in humans they
the ketogenic diet high fat diet impacts
the hormone cholecystokinin which shuts
down appetites it impacts on the 10th
cranial nerve
um you don't have to deliberately
restrict calories for the ketogenic diet
to get cancer well most people most
people do because their appetite is
turned off so uh it's a it's a indirect
calorie restriction nobody sits down and
eats a whole you know let's lead a pound
of butter you know nobody's going to do
that and as a matter of fact there we
are learning now from a lot of our
colleagues there are many palatable
types of ketogenic diets and we
developed the the glucose Ketone index
calculator uh to allow the cancer I I
did it mostly for cancer patients but it
seems like people just want to get
healthy they use the gki it's the ratio
of blood sugar to blood ketones using a
finger prick you Goose keto mojos or
these different instruments to measure
this and you know regardless of what
you're eating if you can keep your gki
levels to 2.0 or below I mean you're
going to put significant metabolic
pressure on these tumor cells so you
know people say oh this ketogenic diet
is unpalatable uh well you can develop a
Mediterranean diet that will do the same
thing uh just gotta just got to use the
gki to let you know what you can eat
what you can eat so and they people are
learning now hey you know I'm a vegan I
can I can get my gki down and uh and I
feel pretty good about the whole thing
and this other guy I'm a carnivore and I
can do the same thing and the
pescetarian and whoever the hell else
you want to be you know the the bottom
line is if you have an instrument now
and a ratio to put pressure on your
cancer cell and you can build your own
diets to see for this so that's a nice
Tool uh that allows the The Physician or
the patient to know when they're in this
Zone and then when they're in this zone
of low of a low glucose Ketone index
that's when you bring in the drugs like
glutamine Inhibitors and other glucose
Inhibitors uh to to fully Target and
eliminate these tumor cells in a
non-toxic way so it's a strategy yeah
you have to be aware of of how to do
this it's you just can't all of a sudden
go into a into a clinic at the top
medical school and say man I'd like to
have metabolic therapy instead of
cartoon immunotherapy oh we don't know
how to do this you know this doesn't
work you know there's no evidence to
someone look you got to read the
scientific literature you know my
favorite thing is there's no evidence it
means translate says I haven't read the
evidence or looked for the evidence you
know this is another thing sometimes I
do these podcasts and and people say
well who's this guy's pulling this crap
out of his ass saying all this kind of
stuff and I said well you want to read
my papers I mean I open access I mean
it's not like I'm making this stuff up I
mean we've been spending 25 years doing
the research and we published the
research it just so happens you don't
read the research I mean what am I
supposed to say you know so everyone's
always this guy getting all this
information you said I did the damn
experiments for crazy you know what I'm
talking about yeah and then I published
them oh I wasn't aware of that well I I
know what more you want me to do write
it in crayon and put a big sign on the
side of the road there's only about nine
million papers in the National Library
medicine so you know I think most
doctors haven't read a fraction of that
yeah no and it's true and I I blame them
I I they're overwhelmed with their
cancer patients and uh trying to do the
best they can uh but what I what bothers
me is they're the absolute absolute
resistance uh on the part of the medical
establishment uh to might even consider
what we're saying and as a matter of
fact as I said uh you only have two
major theories that describe the origin
of cancer and that is the somatic
mutation Theory which is advocated by
the National Cancer Institute if you go
to the National Cancer Institute the fir
the thing you say about cancer cancer is
a genetic disease so this drives the
grant support from the National Cancer
Society and the NIH are all supporting
Gene approaches which then involves the
immunotherapies and all this crazy stuff
that you hear on television every night
and it's all driven by the somatic
mutation theory of cancer
and the the alternative and the correct
theory is that cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease so it's the
mitochondrial metabolic Theory so when
patients go into the clinic they should
ask their oncologist is the treatment
you're giving me based on the somatic
mutation Theory or on the mitochondrial
metabolic theory of course it's like a
deer looking into the headlights most of
the most of them just don't don't know
anything about what I just said but you
know the tragic thing is that the
National Cancer Institute itself is push
is pushing a misinformation on this uh
incorrect Theory the theory cannot is no
longer we've presented so much evidence
that the only way you can say cancer is
a genetic disease is through ideological
Dogma it can no longer be a rational
thinking it's ideological Dogma is is
maintaining uh the status quo in the can
and managing cancer uh you know so you
have to you have to realize and Dogma is
an extremely powerful force on the brain
it underlies religion it underlies
political affiliations and it also
underlies the somatic mutation theory of
cancer so when you put all that together
you can see why we're not making the
kind of advances that we should be
making and it's due mostly to a dogmatic
view that cancer is something other than
what it actually is
talk a little bit more about the
glutamine because it seems like we can
restrict sugar pretty easily through a
ketogenic diet and reduce their
carbohydrate intake and switch to mostly
fat and also we have to limit protein
because protein can turn into sugar in
the body so to be careful it's not a
high protein diet
but what about glutamine because
glutamine is an essential amino acids
involved into the sound production it's
found in many healthful foods such as
fish and dark green leafy vegetables
which we think we should eat you know
when we're you know uh eggs nuts and
seeds soybeans uh you know seaweed meat
so you know wow what are we going to do
how are we going to get away with
limiting glutamine yeah yeah no this is
so so important because I don't know
what it is people uh from all the other
podcasts that I've done they all rush
out and say well what can I what can I
eat to reduce glutamine uh nothing
you can't uh there's no diet that can
reduce glutamine now what we did find
and we're done the work done by George
Cahill and others you know prolonged
water only fasting will reduce glutamine
uh but glutamine as you said is a
non-essential amino acid because we can
make it can make it predominantly from
glucose actually
um but there's no diet uh by itself that
can reduce glutamine so therefore we
need drugs to Target the glutamine I
want to say it again there is no diet
that is can effectively reduce the
availability of glutamine in our body
okay so that's why we need drugs and the
drugs are designed to further put the
pressure on glutamine and as you said
this is an incredible amino acid and may
not be considered an essential amino
acid but it is essential for the immune
system for our gut and for the urea
cycle it's a it's a so when we that's
why the glutamine issue allowed me and
my colleagues to develop the Press pulse
strategy for managing cancer you can
press glucose as you said Mark we don't
need glucose we can replace glucose with
fats and Ketone bodies that the tumor
cells can't use for energy so we can
push glucose levels down pretty low and
then the rest of the normal cells when
they're deprived of glucose will compete
directly with the tumor cell for any
available glucose in the body so we're
really we got the glucose thing under
control the glutamine issue now requires
kid gloves because we know how important
that molecule is for the normal
physiological health of our body so when
we when I say press pulse we press
glucose chronically stress put just diet
can and and some small amounts of other
drugs can press glucose without harming
the body but we pulse are we pulse
glutamine
we can't we can't we can't chronically
deprive our bodies of glutamine because
it's an essential amino acid so we put a
drug like 60 oxine or leucine which is
done uh which has been a known glutamine
inhibitor it shuts down the
glutamanolysis pathway so you can't
metabolize glutamine to glutamate so but
we can't be too aggressive with that
because if we're too aggressive with it
we're going to damage our immune system
we're going to damage our gut we can
damage things so we just put it in there
for a short period of time at a
particular dosage slaughter a whole
bunch of tumor cells and then pull it
away and then we need our immune cells
to come in and pick up the corpses so
our immune cells our immune system and
the tumor are both utilizers of
glutamine so yeah you can kill tumor
cells because they're absolutely
dependent on glutamine but we can also
paralyze the function of our normal
immune system if we keep glutamine
targeting too aggressive on there so we
have to pull it back allow our immune
our our indolent immune system to become
aggressive again pick up the dead
corpses of the cells that we just killed
and then and then hit them again with a
small dose of glutamine so the Press you
press the glucose hold that down with
diet and then you pulse the glutamine
and eventually you gradually degrade the
tumor while enhancing at the same time
enhancing the health and vitality of all
of the normal cells in the body
including the immune system so you have
to know you have to know biology
you have to understand that by the
biology of the different systems that
you're working with because you can play
off one biological system off of another
it's a beautiful elegant system well
once people understand how to do this uh
it's going to be the new it's going to
be the the Paradigm it's going to be the
way we're going to manage all these
differences so you have to do both right
you have to do both the glucose
restriction and you have to inhibit
glutamine Pathways to a drug or a
compound which is not actually an
approved drug it's some research
compound right now it's not about well
it was a proof that they did State they
did
was it phase two trials with this drug I
mean it was used in little kids with
with leukemia it's just that they never
targeted the glucose when they used it
and they didn't know the dosages so it's
like anything you know if you don't know
how to use the tool it's not it's never
going to give you the outcome that you
would have expected it doesn't have side
effects or oh well what we showed yes of
course it has like any drug I mean
radiation has side effects you know
cartoon you know all this stuff has side
effects
um but if you don't if you what we had
what we showed is that when you
administer Dawn with the ketogenic diet
you use much lower dosages and you pulse
the system you don't press the system
and therefore you eliminate the toxicity
while at the same time improving
therapeutic efficacy so therefore you
learned how to use the tool if you don't
use the tool that's what they said oh we
can't use Dawn because it was too toxic
we didn't know how to use it you got to
use it you got to know how to use this
drug and believe me have there been
clinical trials in humans on this well
of course they're they're doing it now
at Johns Hopkins they they took that
drug gone and they put a little tail a
little tail on it made it like a new
drug there's two ways to make a new drug
one you can take an already existing
drug modify it slightly and then say oh
we're going to make a billion dollars on
this the the other way to do it is like
we did we have a drug that we knew
worked but we didn't know how to use it
in the correct context we changed the
context and the drug now becomes super
powerful so it's like like a new drug
but you put it into a different
environment you get the same effect so
you know my my goal is to save lives and
improve quality of life other people may
want to make billions of dollars on this
stuff but either way the bottom line is
that if you use the drug from Johns
Hopkins or you use the the regular drug
in a different context in a different
way the outcome is going to be similar
but now the problem of course is if you
use Don by itself you're never going to
get the complete therapeutic benefit
unless you target the glucose you got to
Target the glucose with it and we also
found that in administration of dawn to
brain cancer in a ketogenic diet the
ketogenic diet facilitates delivery of
the drug through the blood-brain barrier
onto the target so clearly you're going
to get much more bang for your buck by
administering the drug in the ketogenic
diet then if you administered in a high
carbohydrate diet we publish beautiful
papers beautiful papers on this and what
about the data around the Inuit because
they were popular relations that lived
in the Arctic Circle who a primarily fat
whale blubber seal you know uh and they
essentially were on ketogenic diets and
and they had very few cancers right I
mean what did we learn from those
populations well we have a book coming
out from Tim knox's group in uh oh yeah
yeah big book on K on ketogenic diets
used for everything and they talked
about the Inuits uh in that book when
they were first evaluated
um
they were considered to be resistant to
cancer and some of the other chronic
diseases and they never never not they
ate very little vegetables of course
seasonal everything had to be had to be
seasonal but yeah they were in
nutritional ketosis probably for the
majority of their of their lives
and they didn't have any cancer uh you
know I I visited uh the medical
um hospital is that because is that
because we used to diagnose it or
because they actually didn't have it
well you know it's a combination of both
probably I mean who would know whether
some guy might have had some problem I
mean there wasn't a lot of medical
evaluations but the Western Physicians
from I think mostly from England uh I
have to go back and double check on that
but they did some evaluations they I
mean just overall what what chronic any
kind of chronic diseases and you know
the bottom line was there wasn't uh
cancer was not recognized as being any
any concern uh in these folks uh but
when I visited the medical school at
Thunder Bay uh Canada I gave a lecture
there and that medical school
predominantly focuses on the health of
Inuits uh because a large population of
Inuits are in the Canadian provinces in
the northern Arctic Circle and these
folks were just decimated by type 2
diabetes cancer dementia all kinds of
things that they never had
were Afflicted with until Western diets
and Lifestyles came into their
environment and you know the Inuits are
just one example the other example is
Albert schweitzer's evaluation of the
African tribes in various countries of
Africa and the African tribes that lived
according to traditional ways and he
actually was looking for cancer and he
looked at over almost 40 000 Africans
and found not one single case of cancer
in tribes that were following
traditional traditional ways
so clearly cancer is a disease of
Western diets and Lifestyles and um
because it never existed and nor nor
does it exist in our closest primate
relatives to chimpanzee which is about
98 and a half percent similar to us in
Gene and protein sequence and these
these animals are under constant
Veterinary surveillance at the major
zoos and there's never been a documented
case of breast cancer in a female
chimpanzee uh despite the fact that they
have the same very similar if not
identical uh genes and proteins uh that
that we have and we can't do the kind of
experiment that would show the evidence
like if we took uh chimpanzees and gave
them an American diet lifestyle uh in
the zoo uh jelly donuts pizzas and uh
you know big hero sandwiches
they said I asked the Zookeeper at the
San Diego Zoo I said Can why don't you I
said how are these bonobos they have
some bonobos oh they would eat those
donuts like there'd be no tomorrow I
said but I said why don't you give them
go down to the Dunkin Donuts and bring
them in a box of jelly fills they said
animal cruelty
that's right with the animal cruelty so
I said what about us
oh no you know so um but any of them I I
I've always asked that to the uh the
veterinarians at the zoo use with their
their primate I said why don't you guys
go down because you think this guy would
love a big pizza you know Margarita oh
they'd be all over it but they they
can't they can't do that because it's uh
it would be a cruel thing to do today
you know and I say well we're doing it
to ourselves and now we're suffering
from all the consequences uh of this
action and uh consequently we have all
these chronic diseases and then we can
manage them all very effectively if you
listen to the TV coming out with all
these uh wonderful ways that take this
drug that drug do this and then uh you
got a thousand side effects that'll kill
you before before that before the
disease will
you know it's really it's really crazy
man I don't know what to say I want to
ask you a couple more things that I
think are interesting in your work one
is is the you know use of hyperbaric
oxygen therapy as an adjunct to what
you're talking about in combination with
uh interrupting the glucose Pathways in
the glutamine Pathways uh and and by the
way just everybody knows the way we
detect cancer
in screening for recurrence or looking
at someone's overall status because we
use a pet scan which is basically a
special type of skin where we give
people a radioactively labeled sugar
like basically sugar with radioactive
sugar and it goes regular cancer and
that's how we tell what the cancer is it
doesn't work for the glutamine Pathways
but it actually is how we detect
metastatic cancer so is it weird the
doctors say to patients oh don't worry
about you eat why don't you eat ice
cream and milkshakes and I'm like what
are you doing you know this doesn't make
any sense right especially in the
context of knowing just from a from Pure
you know well-established research that
insulin resistance and pre-diabetes and
the whole phenomena of too much sugar or
Diet is driving so many cancers made the
major cancers colon breast prostate
um even some lung cancers pancreatic
cancers are driven by sugar
yeah and that you're right about that I
mean we use fluorodeoxy glucose it's an
analog of glucose that can't be
metabolized so it collects uh in the
tissue and it lights up and
um and you say well there's your cancer
right there you can it's sucking down
the glucose and then at the same on the
same breath you know you're going to
have a drink Enfamil to help you so and
then uh you know one of the things
right yeah and then you take a guy and
they're so fearful of weight loss in a
cancer patient you take a guy who weighs
350 pounds and you say now you got to
eat keep your weight up you know you
wouldn't want you to lose anyway
I mean you got you got to be nuts to say
something like that right so um but but
uh you know the whole thing the whole
thing here is getting back to a
hyperbaric oxygen which was your
original question
um Dom the Agostino and I uh Dom is a
guy who's constantly in nutrition
ketosis he had done some studies in his
lab showing that in Hyperbaric pressure
the cancer cells were exploding and they
would create a tremendous amount of
reactive oxygen species furthermore from
from not only the fact that they produce
Ross but the oxygen Under Pressure
enhances the killing effect of the Ross
so
um what we did in our press pulse big
paper that we wrote The Press pulse
strategy for managing cancer
hyperbaric oxygen was part of the pulse
strategy so if the patient can get into
therapeutic ketosis with the glucose
Ketone index of 2.0 or below we would
then
2.5 atmospheres for about 90 minutes you
could put that patient in hyperbaric
oxygen and hyperbaric oxygen would
essentially facilitate the killing of
the tumor cell through oxidative stress
and it's important to remember that
radiation and some some of the toxic
drugs that we use for cancer Management
in the clinic also kill cancer cells
through oxidative stress but the key is
with hyperbaric oxygen you're killing
the cancer cell with oxidative stress
without causing collateral toxicity to
the rest of the body so it's a
beautifully dovetails in uh with the
overall concept of metabolic therapy and
and that becomes another arm of
treatment is Ox is hyperbaric oxygen
once the patient is in therapeutic
ketosis because we know that that's when
hyperbaric oxygen will have its greatest
therapeutic benefit is when that patient
is has the glucose Ketone index value
which could change during the course of
the day so he would know when to go into
the chain he or she would know when to
go into the the chamber for oxygen
therapy uh when their gki would be at
the lowest point during the day and then
they would schedule treatments that
would be based around around those
values so clearly it becomes an arm of
the therapeutic strategy called a
metabolic
mitochondrial metabolic therapy is the
whole concept for this new new treatment
strategy yeah so I have America oxygen
ketogenic diets now let's talk about
phenylbutyrate and glutamine because
this is a compound that's been around
for a long time and it seems to bind the
glutamate and it causes excretion in the
urine is that a reasonable approach and
is that available as a drug still or
yeah
well I think for blood cancers it could
be very effective
um I haven't tested it yet because in
the mouse we do most of our work in The
Mouse and the way it works in humans is
phenylbutyrate is
metabolized to phenyl acetate and phenyl
acetate then binds with glutamine and
you kind of flush it out of your body
the mouse doesn't have that enzyme so we
we're never able to test phenylbutyrate
in a full full effective way in the
pre-clinical system but I certainly
think it could be effective for uh
because glutamine is the most abundant
amino acid in the in our blood in the
blood of a normal person it's about
five milligram five millimolar I guess
it's about five millimolar constant it's
the most abundant amino acid because it
plays such a vital role in so many of
our physiological processes but
phenobutyrate uh could be an effective
way to reduce levels especially under
calorie restriction and ketogenic diets
could be further a very powerful way to
kill blood cancers and blood cancers
like brain cancer colon cancer they all
have damaged oxidative phosphorylation
so they're all fermenting so they're
using glucose and glutamine and they
become more they would be even more
vulnerable uh to I think I I don't I
don't want to say that with any level of
certainty until I actually do the
experiments myself most of the knowledge
that I provide or tell is because I've
done the I've done the experiments and
I've looked at different things but I
think for human I think for humans it
could be a real value to try to reduce
especially for blood cancers whether it
works for solid tumors it's hard to say
because the the micro environment of the
solid tumor may not be permeable to
phenylbutyrate or fennel acetate and
therefore I cannot speak to that
your learning work has been done in in
animal models in Latina can you talk
about some of the clinical human trials
that are happening now the ones that
have been done what have we learn and
where is this being effective and I've
seen some pretty remarkable things
happening coil by Stone and other
cancers so can you talk about like what
we know right now in humans and where
where you think we're going to be in
three five ten years with cancer
treatment well we're developing a
treatment protocol right now as we speak
a comprehensive treatment protocol for
humans so that we bring together all of
the things that I I was saying in a kind
of how-to manual manual and strategy so
once folks once the medical
professionals uh read this they'll
they'll know what to do and how to do it
and I am working with folks in different
countries right now where there's a
little bit more flexibility in what
we're able to do and to be honest to be
honest with you mark I'll tell you the
mouse basal metabolic rate is seven to
eight times faster than that of a human
so everything happens in a kind of a
split second uh time frame uh whereas in
humans we have so much more flexibility
to really to really max out these
therapies and what we're seeing in
humans we're seeing therapeutic benefits
in humans that we never could see in the
Mouse
um so so you know we have uh not cured
any mice with medicine Advanced
metastatic cancer we've managed it
certainly massively better than if we
didn't do the right thing things but in
humans we're seeing much much greater
therapeutic benefit and dogs too I want
to emphasize that cancer is the number
one killer of domestic dogs and and
we're starting to see tremendous
therapeutic benefit in dogs because
they're basal metabolic rate is closer
to that of a human than it is of a mouse
it's interesting I put my iPod
with sort of widespread metastatic
lymphoma who was given like a few weeks
to live and I basically put them on a
ketogenic diet
and uh he lived for at least a year when
he stopped eating the food and then I
said all right I'll just give him the
food he likes again and then he died
within a few weeks it was quite amazing
yeah no it's unbelievable and as a
matter of fact we published the papers
Open Access in Frontiers and nutrition
on uh the complete resolution of mast
cell cancer in a dog
um with with no radiation chemothers or
anything just metabolic therapy and we
and we pulled we published the recipe in
there so if anyone has a dog with cancer
the recipe for managing the cancer with
without toxicity is present in that
paper and
um uh you know it works in dogs really
well and I think we're going to be able
to manage the cancer and the dogs so the
dogs become now a really good tool to
fair to to test out all these things
that we want to plant to put into humans
but I what what I do in my in my
pre-clinical mouse models is we can
troubleshoot uh all the different
strategies doses timing and scheduling
uh that will be necessary before the
eventual long-term management and
possible resolution of the majority of
human cancers so uh and that's how the
funding for our research comes
predominantly from private foundations
and philanthropy and because there are
folks out there that know we are on the
right track and as you said when will
this become a reality is not clear to me
because I mean you have an Institute
powerful institutions that have built up
around the somatic mutation theory of
cancer so you get this dog dogmatic
ideology that keeps the the status quo
but you have to basically the Earth is
flat and yeah yeah the Earth is round
right yeah well no the the the the
center of the earth the center of the
solar system is the earth not the sun
right this is the heliocentric uh you
know geocentric theory that was broken
down and and the Catholic Church adhered
very strongly to keeping the Earth in
the center of the solar system until
Galileo Copernicus and Kepler came along
to prove that it could not be so um we
we have absolutely shown that Cancer
Cannot Be A genetic disease absolutely
cannot be a genetic disease and I have
written all these papers and people say
oh I don't believe you I don't believe
we'll read the read the damn papers will
you and then you'll come to the and come
to the realization uh that this is what
it is so once you realize it's not a
genetic disease and it is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease the
field will shift over and it will shift
over because people want to live I mean
you have a very uh anxious population of
suffering people that would like to have
their disease managed in a more logical
way not some through some medieval uh
kind of stuff that we're doing to these
folks today so uh clearly it's going to
happen it has to happen and it will
happen because what we're doing today is
not working cancer is going to overtake
heart disease soon and that's only
because we're locked into the somatic
mutation theory of cancer and once you
once you realize the sun is the center
of the solar system you're going to
start to see advanced is real fast
really effective amazing so
um but it's not necessarily just
something we have to do alone and I I've
seen data for example from Walter Longo
who uses calorie restriction
diets as an adjunct of therapy for chemo
and radiation it seems that ketogenic
diets can be used along with chemo
radiation to actually improve their
effectiveness and I have a very close
friend who had uh you know uh throat
cancer basically and had neck cancer and
uh was you know very poor diagnosis and
he decided to go on a ketogenic diet and
get chemo and radiation and not only did
he do great but there's been no cancer
three years out and he's also also
actually
had no side effects from the treatment
because of the way that the the treat
the ketogenic diet protect them against
the chemo and radiation of side effects
yeah yeah well I think that's important
because we're going to go through a
hybrid system because you can't
dramatically change one one series of
treatments over to another overnight so
you're going to have to gradually go
through this kind of a hybrid system
where some level of radiation or some
level of chemotherapy uh or even
immunotherapies may be enhanced in their
in their action when combined together
with metabolic therapy so uh there's
going to be that hybrid transition and
that might be essential because you know
some of the strategies for the complete
resolution of cancer using metabolic
approaches alone are not yet completely
developed and validated in clinical
trials so you will have this inter
interim hybrid approach like all major
technologies that go from one Paradigm
to another there's always this hybrid uh
a transitory hybrid system and I think
we're going to realize that extremely
and this is what some of our clinics are
doing extremely low doses of chemo uh
managed together with metabolic therapy
seem to be far more effective with most
with significantly lower toxicity so
whether that's radiation or chemo uh you
can significantly improve the outcome uh
by by using much lower Doses and these
kinds of things so I think that until we
come up with the the most elegant and
complete a way of managing cancer with
metabolic therapy alone I think we're
going to have this hybrid transition
period
and what you know what is your
conversation with an oncologist you get
invited to the oncology meetings to talk
to them what do they say
well it's a it it's a it's a variation
of things I I think some of them feel
threatened sometimes like what are you
going to do you know you're touching my
meal ticket here you know I I do this
for a living and now you're coming along
saying I shouldn't do what I'm doing I
think for certain certain cases like a
radiation of brain cancer I think that
should be eliminated uh as soon as
possible I I think that's an outrage I
have published papers clearly showing
how the radiation of a of a patient with
glioblastoma elicits the rapid
recurrence and death of the patients and
I I provided that I provided them the
metabolic mechanisms by which that is
happening and we show that why the why
the survival of these patients is so
poor is because they're radiating the
the brain of these patients now whether
that's not may not be the case for other
types of cancers so in in those kinds of
situations we may we may be able to have
a more transitional uh uh situation but
certainly not for brain cancer but when
you talk to uh some oncologists uh
they're kind of surprised a lot most of
the oncologists that support our work
are those guys that are now retired it's
kind of like yeah I knew what I was
doing all my life was and it wasn't the
best and now I realize but I'm no longer
practicing medicine and now I can pretty
much come out and say and say the things
that I would have never said if I were
practicing so so I I see that I always
have to laugh about that
um but you know I have a quick question
and you're you know being in this field
you need to share a few stories before
we close uh patients you know who've
been treated or tried themselves or what
the stories are because I think you know
they're consider these anecdotes but
anecdotes are really the beginning of
hypotheses and they're the beginning of
actually the scientific research method
which is actually absorbing what you see
and being curious about it and creating
a hypothesis so let's talk about some of
those cases and what you think yeah the
most remarkable one was Pablo Kelly uh
from England who who was written up in
all the newspapers over there and he has
his own little podcast thing I think he
came to me in 2014 uh with um he heard
from Andrew Scarborough his friend who
had a high grade glioma who took one
radiation shot he said I'm adding I'm
not doing that again so Pablo talked to
Andrew Anderson contact C3 so he came to
me in 2014 Pablo Kelly he had just been
diagnosed with a glioblastoma and
um he he said to me do you think the
metabolic diet therapy would work and I
said geez you know I I think it might
but I but I don't know we've done it
mice but we've never really done it in a
human and he started it and they said
you're going to be dead in nine months
Pablo his oncologist got really angry
and if you listen to his his stories uh
how they brought him in they had him put
him he threw all that stuff off and uh
just went on the metabolic therapy and
um he his tumor didn't grow very fast
and uh finally after no surgery even had
no surgery and nothing which was really
shocking and then after three years
um he he decided he kept emailing me and
he said I'm still alive in fact I hadn't
heard from him for two years he emails
me he said I'm Pablo Pablo here I said
Pablo Jesus I thought you would have
been dead I didn't know you're still
alive so so
um then three years after the diagnosis
he did a a surgical and my colleagues
some radiation
um
Radiologists said this is growing so you
probably have to have it to both so he
had went in got the bulk surgery for the
first time three years after diagnosis
and then um we followed him he has five
years of of daily and sometimes more
than one day glucose Ketone index so in
the in the paper that I published uh
which is in again Frontiers and
nutrition we put in Pablo's story so I
didn't write Pablo's story up until uh
five years after his initial diagnosis
so I didn't want to write something up
prematurely and say you know are we
thinking this poor guy dies at you know
a little longer than than what you'd
have expected he's now out almost nine
years he's still alive and um wow
yeah and then we found out that the idh1
mutation which is interesting because it
acts like a drug it's God's gift to the
GBM patient it's it's a draw it's a gene
that disrupts glycolysis and
glutamanolysis and here's the crazy
thing there are drug companies out there
thinking that that mutation is bad so
they make drugs to Target what what we
consider a therapeutic mutation and
their drugs are killing the cancer
patients some of the patients fasting
it's like nuts so unless you understand
the biology of the disease you're
working with you really make you can
make real major errors but anyway that
story of Pablo and you can get you
people can read about him uh he's on
British television he was on newspapers
he has his own podcast and then there's
a there's a movie coming a documentary
that will that will highlight the
stories of all of these kinds of
patients that should have been dead that
are alive and the the documentary is
called the cancer Revolution it was made
by Maggie Jones another other stage 4
breast cancer person where the
metastasized to all her lungs and brain
and she's still alive who had done
metabolic therapy and she her husband is
Brad Jones a documentary movie guy and
then she says uh Brad you got to make a
movie on this stuff and so he's making a
documentary and they're collecting uh as
you said these anecdotes well there's
not a few there's a now a whole slug of
these anecdote guys that are out there
and the question is you know why are we
not doing clinical trials to prove that
this is a a very effective way and the
answer is
we don't do clinical trust because we
don't have people that aren't
knowledgeable enough to do it and the
hospitals can't generate Revenue doing
clinical trials but we're not using
these kinds of drugs but I think we can
work through all of this I I think there
will be a way to to do this because you
can't collect so many anecdotal
evidences of stage four people that
should be dead that are walking on the
planet over and over and over again
whether it's brain cancer lung cancer
colon cancer kidney cancer bladder
cancer uh you know all of these
different Cancers and so-called Walking
Dead people uh I mean there all seem to
be getting on with their life they're
living having a high quality of life you
just can't suppress this stuff for any
longer I mean it's becoming too too too
much and it's based on hard science
so once you have the mechanisms of the
hard science uh we're going to start
seeing it and then some people will say
well I can't believe it until the
clinical trial they won't believe it
even with a clinical trial so we're
always going to have the people that
will never believe this through dogmatic
ideology and how do I know that because
we did clinical trials on ketogenic diet
for epilepsy and some people said we can
never use a ketogenic diet for epilepsy
until it's a clinical trial so we did a
clinical to my colleagues did a clinical
trial and they still want to give drugs
rather than ketogenic diet so so it's
just you know it's just part of the
system so it's going to happen I know
it's definitely going to happen I can't
tell you when I don't know uh but we
we're not if we're still sitting here in
30 years talking about car T
immunotherapy and pdl1 this kind of
crazy stuff based on a somatic mutation
Theory no no no things will definitely
change the the field is changing rapidly
I mean I think this is one of the most
exciting conversations I've ever had
about cancer and and all of us are
affected either and personally or family
members or friends it's really such a
widespread condition and we're really
not winning the war very much I think
we've made incremental benefits some
cancers we definitely have had good
cures for but very far and few between
and I think there is some benefit to
cartoon therapy and you know pd1 and you
know we'll call it checkpoint Inhibitors
uh there are there are improvements in
things like cancer vaccines but I think
they're again moving around the edges
rather than dealing with the fundamental
metabolic issue which is actually
driving most cancerous yeah well I think
though I there's no question if I looked
at the data for pdl1 Inhibitors and you
get about 20 20 to 30 percent of people
that really do really well then you have
a majority of people that it doesn't do
anything and then you have a 20 of the
people where you get what we call hyper
Progressive disease where the where the
therapy kills you faster than the tumor
does and it's called hyper Progressive
disease it's well known in the
scientific literature okay so you know
why would you take why would anyone want
to take a drug that would have a remote
possibility of killing you you know uh I
mean this is the truth this is what
happens I have that that again people
should read the literature about
hyperprogressive disease immunotherapies
are based on the somatic mutation theory
of cancer if the theory underlying the
treatment is not correct you're not
going to get the the the results that
you would have predicted at the
beginning okay so
um and I have hundreds of people
emailing me who tell me how their
immunotherapies have not worked and now
they want to do metabolic therapy so I
see a lot of those folks so basically
the messages start with metabolic
therapy don't wait till the last minute
and try and after you've done everything
else in your last legs because metabolic
therapy is essentially risk-free it's
got no side effects really maybe maybe
the the glutamate Inhibitors do but I
think I think it's as a whole a very
safe effective and by the way uh almost
free therapy because it's just what
you're eating yeah another thing marks
listen it's very important if you can
pare down the size of that tumor to a
few a few cells that are just hanging on
they become extremely vulnerable to a
potential uh immunotherapy because
there's where there's where they may all
express the same epitope and therefore
the immunotherapy could just blast them
out of existence but you wouldn't want
to do it when you have the whole
hodgepodge of cells at the beginning
bring them down to a small manageable
group of cells by metabolic therapy and
then polish them off with a car D
immunotherapy or or or an immunotherapy
so you're right everything is bass
awkwards whether we're doing it now you
gotta you got to start with metabolic
therapy shrink the tumor down make
yourself healthy and then come in with
some of these more perfected treatments
makes sense right yeah it totally makes
sense
if you loved that last video You're
Gonna Love the next one check it out
here insulin release will cause weight
gain insulin resistance will cause heart
disease diabetes Alzheimer's cancer and
virtually all of the other chronic
metabolic diseases that are chewing
through our entire Health Care system